Xss is about making websites run unintended script. This can cause stolen data, actions to be performed on behalf of the user, and more. An attacker wants a javascript payload to execute in a victims browser through a website that is unsafe and lets the script run. Three main types of Xss are reflected (a request causes malicious script to execute), stored (the bad script was stored in the server and delivered to the user), and DOM based (the client side code is vulnerable and processes information in an unsafe way). While scanning can be done, manual testing of xss involves submitting input in every entry point in an application and seeing how that input is treated in http responses and whether they are capable of executing script as well as understanding the context of how xss occurs. In the case of the DOM, you try to see where in the dok input is and if its in an exploitable place. In DOM xss a source is where a payload enters the browser and a sink is a dangerous object or function that executes the payload. Xss is prevented by filtering input, encoding the data so it isnt interpreted as code that needs to run, using content headers to specify to the browser what was meant to be sent, and content security policy. 

Knowing the context, which is where in the response the controllable data apears and how its processed. When the XSS context is text between HTML tags, you need to introduce some new HTML tags designed to trigger execution of JavaScript ```<script>alert(document.domain)</script>```. Maybe its in an html tag attribute, if so you can maybe close the attribute value and tag, and then start a new one. In many cases angle brackets will be blocked or encoded so maybe just the attribute can be terminated and a new one can be made that runs script ```" autofocus onfocus=alert(document.domain) x="```. Maybe the context is in a type of HTML tag attribute that itself can create a scriptable context. An example of this is using the javascript pseudo-protocol in an href attribute to execute script. ```<a href="javascript:alert(document.domain)">``` The JavaScript pseudo-protocol, denoted by javascript:, is a mechanism that allows the execution of JavaScript code directly within contexts that typically expect a Uniform Resource Identifier (URI), such as the href attribute of an <a> tag or the address bar of a web browser. Sometimes the context is in the javascript. 
